SETUP.md, before:

Development Setup
=================

Here are instructions on how to get started on ExaCloud and setting up the
development environment needed to run the DADA2 workflow.

**Table of Contents**

- [R Environment Setup](#r-environment-setup)
- [Package Management](#package-management)
- [Slurm Workload Manager](#slurm-workload-manager)

R Environment Setup
-------------------

There is a file `install-pkgs.R`, which contains code you can run to check the
correct version of R and install and/or check the necessary R packages to
install necessary to run the analysis.

Additionally, being on a cluster without root access, you'll want to specify
where to install your R packages, as you can't write to more upstream
directories. You can use the following to create a `.Renviron` file for R to
point to where you want to install R packages.

```bash
# Change paths according to your personal setup
mkdir -p ~/R/library
echo 'R_LIBS_USER="~/R/library"' > $HOME/.Renviron
```

Source: https://csg.sph.umich.edu/docs/R/localpackages.html

Package Management
------------------

**Interactive Session**

To run an interactive session, run the following:

```bash
srun --pty /usr/bin/bash -l
```

This will allow you to test your code and workflow without worrying about
stressing out the head coordinating node.

**Setup**

Follow the instructions listed in [this document][exacloud] to setup a modern
development environment on the cluster. This isn't necessary if your
development environment is on a cluster where you have root access or you're
implementing this workflow locally.

Briefly, following the instructions linked above will give you the following:

- Miniconda, Python package and virtual environment management
- Linuxbrew, non-root package management on Linux systems

For this R workflow, you'll only really need to install Miniconda and R
essentials. The Anaconda environment has build [an `r-essential`
package][condar] with R and most used R packages for data science.

In sum,

```bash
# Open an interactive session
srun --pty bash -l

# Download and install Miniconda
wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda2-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Miniconda2-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Say yes to adding Miniconda to .bash_profile

# Install R and relevant packages
conda install r-essentials

# For maintenance and update of all packages
conda update r-essentials

# For updating a single particular R package, replace XXXX
conda update r-XXXX
```

[exacloud]: https://github.com/greenstick/bootstrapping-package-management-on-exacloud
[condar]: https://conda.io/docs/r-with-conda.html

Slurm Workload Manager
----------------------

Slurm is the resource manager that I'll focus on for this workflow. Slurm
stands for "Simple Linux Utility for Resource Management."

Below are some useful commands to use within Slurm:

```bash
# Submit your script, first_script.sh
sbatch first_script.sh

# Look at jobs in the queue
squeue
```

You can use [this website][ceci] to help generate Slurm scripts. It is designed
for another cluster, but it should at least help with the initial drafting of a
submit script you'll want to use.

[ceci]: http://www.ceci-hpc.be/scriptgen.html

Source: http://www.cism.ucl.ac.be/Services/Formations/slurm/2016/slurm.pdf

Commit message:

Add instructions on how to reset paths for Conda
This commit adds comments on how to reset the paths so that you can
start seeing changes and are then able to use the new Conda
installations of R and its packages.

SETUP.md, after:

Development Setup
=================

Here are instructions on how to get started on ExaCloud and setting up the
development environment needed to run the DADA2 workflow.

**Table of Contents**

- [R Environment Setup](#r-environment-setup)
- [Package Management](#package-management)
- [Slurm Workload Manager](#slurm-workload-manager)

R Environment Setup
-------------------

There is a file `install-pkgs.R`, which contains code you can run to check the
correct version of R and install and/or check the necessary R packages to
install necessary to run the analysis.

Additionally, being on a cluster without root access, you'll want to specify
where to install your R packages, as you can't write to more upstream
directories. You can use the following to create a `.Renviron` file for R to
point to where you want to install R packages.

```bash
# Change paths according to your personal setup
mkdir -p ~/R/library
echo 'R_LIBS_USER="~/R/library"' > $HOME/.Renviron
```

Source: https://csg.sph.umich.edu/docs/R/localpackages.html

Package Management
------------------

**Interactive Session**

To run an interactive session, run the following:

```bash
srun --pty /usr/bin/bash -l
```

This will allow you to test your code and workflow without worrying about
stressing out the head coordinating node.

**Setup**

Follow the instructions listed in [this document][exacloud] to setup a modern
development environment on the cluster. This isn't necessary if your
development environment is on a cluster where you have root access or you're
implementing this workflow locally.

Briefly, following the instructions linked above will give you the following:

- Miniconda, Python package and virtual environment management
- Linuxbrew, non-root package management on Linux systems

For this R workflow, you'll only really need to install Miniconda and R
essentials. The Anaconda environment has build [an `r-essential`
package][condar] with R and most used R packages for data science.

In sum,

```bash
# Open an interactive session
srun --pty bash -l

# Download and install Miniconda
wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda2-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Miniconda2-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Say yes to adding Miniconda to .bash_profile

# Install R and relevant packages
conda install r-essentials

# For maintenance and update of all packages
conda update r-essentials

# For updating a single particular R package, replace XXXX
conda update r-XXXX
```

You'll need to sign out and sign back in of the cluster for the paths to be
reset so that R and other Conda installations will be used instead of the
system installations.

[exacloud]: https://github.com/greenstick/bootstrapping-package-management-on-exacloud
[condar]: https://conda.io/docs/r-with-conda.html

Slurm Workload Manager
----------------------

Slurm is the resource manager that I'll focus on for this workflow. Slurm
stands for "Simple Linux Utility for Resource Management."

Below are some useful commands to use within Slurm:

```bash
# Submit your script, first_script.sh
sbatch first_script.sh

# Look at jobs in the queue
squeue
```

You can use [this website][ceci] to help generate Slurm scripts. It is designed
for another cluster, but it should at least help with the initial drafting of a
submit script you'll want to use.

[ceci]: http://www.ceci-hpc.be/scriptgen.html

Source: http://www.cism.ucl.ac.be/Services/Formations/slurm/2016/slurm.pdf
